# Phylogenetic distribution of erythromycin sensitivity in marine phytoplankton

## Marta Sendra 1, Alejandro Damián-Serrano 2,  Cristiano V.M. Araújo 1, Ignacio Moreno-Garrido 1 and Julián Blasco 1 

1 Department of Ecology and Coastal Management, Institute of Marine Sciences of Andalusia (CSIC), Campus Río S. Pedro, 11510 Puerto Real, Cádiz, Spain.  
2 Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, 06520, New Haven, CT, USA.

Macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin have been recorded at high concentrations in coastal waters and can pose severe threats to marine microbial life. Macrolides may affect microalgae by inhibiting the pathways involved in photosynthetic metabolism and protein synthesis in the chloroplast (of bacterial origin), which ultimately depress cell growth. Since the target of erythromycin that leads to interference with protein synthesis is 23S rRNA, we hypothesize that evolutionary differences in the 23S rRNA structure could explain some of the observed differences in erythromycin sensitivity among species of phytoplankton. Additionally, we assessed whether evolutionary divergence in chloroplast and eukaryotic host gene trees could explain the differences in sensitivity to erythromycin across microalgae. The main goals of this study are to (1) assess the sensitivity to erythromycin in eight species of marine microalgae, and (2) characterize the phylogenetic distribution of the ecotoxicological endpoints across potentially relevant evolutionary histories. For this purpose, two green algae, four heterokonts, one haptophyte and one dinoflagellate were assayed for sensitivity to erythromycin. Population growth, autofluorescence, cell complexity, cell size, effective quantum yield of PSII, chlorophyll and apparent electron transport were the measured endpoints. Phylogenetic trees were built from DNA sequence alignments and alternative evolutionary models were fitted and compared for each variable on each tree. Diatoms were the most sensitive group of microalgae, presenting the greatest inhibitory response in all ecotoxicological endpoints. The 23S rRNA gene tree had the highest explanatory power on the sensitivity distribution among the trees evaluated, yet non-random patterns were found for some endpoints in all of them. In summary, the evolutionary history of microalgae is a key predictor to assess the risks of pollutants of emerging concern to different groups of marine phytoplankton. This novel approach is a step forward in the development of sensitivity models accounting for the phylogeny and ecotoxicological properties of the contaminants.

## Keywords: Erythromycin, phytoplankton, ecotoxicology, phylogeny, 23S rRNA 
